facilitators.md, before:

# 2024 Summer of Nix: Call for mob facilitators

We are looking for mob facilitators to run 160 hours of [remote mob programming](https://www.remotemobprogramming.org/) sessions over 13 weeks between May and September 2024 for this year’s [Summer of Nix](https://github.com/ngi-nix/summer-of-nix).

# Requirements

You should have extensive experience with mob programming. You should be confident that you could bring a group of developers who are mob programming novices to success within a few weeks. This requires leadership and programming skills. Nix experience is a bonus.

Your main responsibility will be to assemble a team and facilitate their work. You will be in charge of the process — such as keeping to the schedule and following software development best practices — as well as the outcome of your team’s work: getting selected free and open source software (FOSS) to work reliably on a whim.

# Compensation and benefits

The Summer of Nix motto is **work, learn, and meet**:

- You will receive a stipend:
    - 5000 EUR for EU residents
    - Adjusted to purchasing power parity for residents of other countries
- You will likely learn many things about the Nix ecosystem
- You will expand your professional network
- You will get a free ticket for NixCon 2024
- Your blog posts, talks, or public appearances related to Summer of Nix will find an audience in the Nix community

# Working conditions

- You will publish an introduction of yourself as a facilitator, and set a schedule for your future mob.
- You will process mob member applications and select four people for your mob.
- You will facilitate mob programming sessions on your schedule.
- You will ensure that your mob is aligned with the program by participating in regular check-ins with program organisers and other mobs.
- Due to the nature of this project's collaboration model, your work results, including your contributions to technical discussion, will appear in publicly accessible places on the internet, such as GitHub, and remain there indefinitely.

Check the [2023 Summer of Nix program updates](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/2023-summer-of-nix-program-updates/30376) for impressions of what to expect.

# Application process

People from anywhere in the world can apply, regardless of background. We strive to have a collaboration environment that is safe, constructive, friendly, and diverse.

- Message Shahar “Dawn” Or until 2024-03-24
    - GitHub: [@mightyiam](https://github.com/mightyiam)
    - Discourse: [@mightyiam](https://discourse.nixos.org/u/mightyiam)
    - Matrix: [@mightyiam:matrix.org](https://matrix.to/#/@mightyiam:matrix.org)
- Provide a general idea of your experience in
    - Mob programming
    - Software development
    - Collaborating in a public online community
    - Nix
- Dawn will schedule a call with you

In 2023 we had 7 applicants and 2 were selected. In 2024 we aim to have 5 facilitators.

Commit message:

sharpening of facilitator profile and application process

facilitators.md, after:

# 2024 Summer of Nix: Call for mob facilitators

We are looking for mob facilitators to run 160 hours of [remote mob programming](https://www.remotemobprogramming.org/) sessions over 13 weeks between May and September 2024 for this year’s [Summer of Nix](https://github.com/ngi-nix/summer-of-nix).
You are tasked to assemble a team who may have no experience with mob programming and guide them into successful collaboration and productivity.
You will be in charge of the process, including keeping to the schedule and following software development best practices — as well as the outcome of the team’s work: getting selected free and open source software (FOSS) to work reliably on a whim.

# Profile

An optimal applicant would meet the following:

- Extensive experience with software development
- Firm grasp on best practices such as test driven and atomic commits
- Excellent control of git, including rewriting history and conflict resolution
- Team coaching experience
- Nix experience is a bonus.

# Compensation and benefits

The Summer of Nix motto is **work, learn, and meet**:

- You will receive a stipend:
    - 5000 EUR for EU residents
    - Adjusted to purchasing power parity for residents of other countries
- You will likely learn many things about the Nix ecosystem
- You will expand your professional network
- You will get a free ticket for NixCon 2024
- Your blog posts, talks, or public appearances related to Summer of Nix will find an audience in the Nix community

# Working conditions

- You will publish an introduction of yourself as a facilitator, and set a schedule for your future mob.
- You will process mob member applications and select four people for your mob.
- You will facilitate mob programming sessions on your schedule.
- You will ensure that your mob is aligned with the program by participating in regular check-ins with program organisers and other mobs.
- Due to the nature of this project's collaboration model, your work results, including your contributions to technical discussion, will appear in publicly accessible places on the internet, such as GitHub, and remain there indefinitely.

Check the [2023 Summer of Nix program updates](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/2023-summer-of-nix-program-updates/30376) for impressions of what to expect.

# Application process

People from anywhere in the world can apply, regardless of background. We strive to have a collaboration environment that is safe, constructive, friendly, and diverse.

- Message Shahar “Dawn” Or until 2024-03-24
    - GitHub: [@mightyiam](https://github.com/mightyiam)
    - Discourse: [@mightyiam](https://discourse.nixos.org/u/mightyiam)
    - Matrix: [@mightyiam:matrix.org](https://matrix.to/#/@mightyiam:matrix.org)
- Explain, in general, how you fit [the profile](#profile).
- If you are deemed to fit the profile, you will have a video call with Dawn.

It is up to the organizers to make selection decisions based on their best discernment, provided the information they have and the impressions they perceive.
Applicants are encouraged to ask for feedback.

In 2023 we had 7 applicants and 2 were selected. In 2024 we aim to have 5 facilitators.
