README.md, before:

# Summer of Nix 2025

Summer of Nix is a coordinated effort to support selected free and open source software (FOSS) projects, by making them available on NixOS.
It is funded by the European Commission's [Next Generation Internet (NGI)](https://www.ngi.eu/) initiative through the [NLNet Foundation](https://nlnet.nl/) and the [NixOS Foundation](https://github.com/NixOS/foundation).

This northern-hemisphere-summer program is designed for students and early-career professionals.
It is an opportunity to:
- Practice disciplined software development with Nix in an organisational setting
- Work with a dedicated team of experienced maintainers
- Contribute to the public good and receive some payment for it

Participation in Summer of Nix can also be a pathway to attractive jobs in software development.

Learn more about Nix on [nix.dev](https://nix.dev/).
Follow [updates on Summer of Nix on the NixOS Discourse](https://discourse.nixos.org/c/events/summer-of-nix/45).

## Goals

The program is intended for participants to **work, learn, and meet**:

- Improving the deployment story of [software projects funded by the NLnet Foundation](https://nlnet.nl/project/)

  Just writing the code is not enough: Programs have to be easy to obtain and run to be widely adopted.
  Getting complex software to work reliably on a whim is the aspiration for Summer of Nix.

  As a participant, you will write Nix derivations, NixOS modules, integration tests, and documentation.
  And you will solve a lot of tricky problems on the way.

- Skill-sharing among participants

  Making computers useful for a mass audience requires diverse skills and broad knowledge, and no one person has it all.

  As a participant, you will learn from – and teach – your peers about widely used programming languages, software testing, technical writing, web design, and the Nix ecosystem with its various tools.
  You will closely collaborate with a mentor and the project team on a regular schedule.

- Growing the Nix community

  As a participant, you will be at the heart of a community with [more than 700 active contributors](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pulse/monthly).
  You will engage in an open source software development workflow and take part in public technical discussion.

  After successful participation, you will be invited to NixCon 2025, a conference for Nix users and developers from all over the world.
  And you will be afforded an opportunity for exposure with potential employers for whom Nix is a core strength.

## Timeline

- March: Organisers recruit mentors
- April to May: Mentors recruit participants
- June to September: Work period with regular meetings

## Applications

### Requirements

To be considered for participation, applicants must demonstrate:
- Fluency in English
- Essential programming skills, including proficiency with
  - Plain text editing
  - Git version control
  - Programming in Bash
- Competence with the Nix language, the module system, NixOS tests, and related tools

Additionally, applicants have to:
- Meet the [technical requirements](#technical-requirements)
- Be available for a total of 160 hours of regular sessions over 13 weeks

### Selection criteria

We are looking for quick learners with a computational mindset.
We select for qualification and motivation, and especially appreciate candidates with:
- Ability to troubleshoot software written in any of: C, Rust, Python, PHP, Java, JavaScript 
- Non-trivial contributions to Nixpkgs
- Packages maintained in Nixpkgs
- [Merge access to Nixpkgs](https://github.com/NixOS/org/blob/main/doc/nixpkgs-committers.md)

We also value diverse perspectives and backgrounds.
People who identify as members of groups currently underrepresented in open source software development communities are particularly encouraged to apply.
We put emphasis on establishing a safe, respectful, and inclusive environment where everyone can contribute their best.

### Eligibility

Natural persons of legal age from anywhere in the world can apply.

You must be able to receive payments via one of:

- Bank transfer
- [PayPal](https://www.paypal.com)
- [Wise](https://wise.com)

### Stipends

Stipends are adjusted to purchasing power parity for your country of residence: [list of stipends by country](./stipends.md).

### How to apply

Please provide the following information:

- GitHub handle
- Programming languages and tooling experience
- Notable contributions to the Nix ecosystem
- Which projects would you like to work on and why?

  Pick between 1 and 3 projects from our [issue tracker](https://github.com/ngi-nix/ngipkgs/issues?q=is%3Aissue%20state%3Aopen%20label%3A%22NGI%20Project%22).
  You can add missing projects using the [project triaging template](https://github.com/ngi-nix/ngipkgs/issues/new?template=project-triaging.yaml).

- What do you expect to gain from participating?

  Write one or two paragraphs to give us an impression of yourself.

- Time zone and availability
- How did you learn about Summer of Nix?

Be creative! Feel free to add what you deem important for us to know.

Don't worry if your profile doesn't perfectly align with the listed criteria:
Showcase your passions and adjacent skills.
We appreciate both transferable experience and potential.

<details><summary>Example application</summary>

```text
GitHub handle: @jane-random

Programming languages and tooling experience:
(beginner, intermediate, proficient, advanced, expert)
- Nix: intermediate
- Bash: proficient
- Git: advanced

Notable contributions to the Nix ecosystem:
- Added Keyoxide metadata: https://github.com/ngi-nix/ngipkgs/pull/558

Projects I would like to work on:
- Pixelfed: https://github.com/ngi-nix/ngipkgs/issues/819
  to be able to host my own instance

What I expect to gain from participating:
- Connect with the community and learn from Nix experts

Time zone and availability:
- Monday to Friday: 09:00—-14:00 Europe/Berlin
- Wednesday: 15:00--18:00 Europe/Berlin

How did you learn about Summer of Nix?
- @joe-random brought it up during one of our discussions
```

</details>

Send a plain text email, without any attachments, images, or other embedded elements until 2025-05-12 0:00UTC to
[ngi@nixos.org](mailto:ngi@nixos.org?subject=Summer%20of%20Nix%202025%3A%20%3CYOUR_NAME%3E%20application&body=GitHub%20handle%3A%20%40jane-random%0A%0AProgramming%20languages%20and%20tooling%20experience%3A%0A(beginner%2C%20intermediate%2C%20proficient%2C%20advanced%2C%20expert)%0A-%20Nix%3A%20intermediate%0A-%20Bash%3A%20proficient%0A-%20Git%3A%20advanced%0A%0ANotable%20contributions%20to%20the%20Nix%20ecosystem%3A%0A-%20Added%20Keyoxide%20metadata%3A%20https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fngi-nix%2Fngipkgs%2Fpull%2F558%0A%0AProjects%20I%20would%20like%20to%20work%20on%3A%0A-%20Pixelfed%3A%20https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fngi-nix%2Fngipkgs%2Fissues%2F819%0A%20%20to%20be%20able%20to%20host%20my%20own%20instance%0A%0AWhat%20I%20expect%20to%20gain%20from%20participating%3A%0A-%20Connect%20with%20the%20community%20and%20learn%20from%20Nix%20experts%0A%0ATime%20zone%20and%20availability%3A%0A-%20Monday%20to%20Friday%3A%2009%3A00--14%3A00%20Europe%2FBerlin%0A-%20Wednesday%3A%2015%3A00--18%3A00%20Europe%2FBerlin%0A%0AHow%20did%20you%20learn%20about%20Summer%20of%20Nix%3F%0A-%20%40joe-random%20brought%20it%20up%20during%20one%20of%20our%20discussions%0A).

### Schedule

- Application phase: 2025-04-17 to 2025-05-12

  After the application closes the team will select up to 10 candidates for interviews.

- Interview phase: 2025-05-19 to 2025-05-28

  Selected candidates will have a video call with team members.

- Final selection: 2025-05-31

  A contract offer will be sent to 2 to 3 applicants for confirmation.

## Technical requirements

Effective remote collaboration requires being able to simultaneously share your screen, view others' screens, talk to each other, and compile software.
This is only possible with sufficiently performant hardware, and therefore it's a condition for participation:

- Video camera
- Headphones and reasonable-quality microphone
- Consistently low-noise environment
- Enough processing power for multiple concurrent video streams
- Sufficient and stable bandwidth throughout multiple hours of video call

From the organisers' experience, mobile data is unlikely to suffice.

Please ask a friend to make a test call on [Jitsi Meet](https://meet.jit.si/) to ensure that they can see your screen and hear you well.

## Questions and answers

### How to get notifications and updates?

Notifications are posted in the public Matrix room [Summer of Nix Announcements](https://matrix.to/#/#summer-of-nix-announce:matrix.org).
Set up your [Matrix client](https://matrix.org/try-matrix/) to receive push notifications on new messages.

News about the program are published in the [Summer of Nix Discourse category](https://discourse.nixos.org/c/events/summer-of-nix/45).
[Subscribe](https://meta.discourse.org/t/notifications-primer/228439) to receive push notifications or emails on new messages.

### Do I have to pay taxes on my stipend?

It depends.
**You are responsible for observing the laws that apply to you when receiving payments.**

The stipend is compensation for work towards a non-profit cause.
This means that in some jurisdictions it may be exempt from income tax, value-added tax (VAT), or from counting towards social insurance or health insurance obligations.

In some jurisdictions you may have to register a business to legally account for receiving payments.

Note that the stipend amount is exactly what the NixOS Foundation can pay.
If you have to process VAT, the gross expense for the NixOS Foundation still must be the stipend amount, even if you put "reverse charge" on the invoice.

### Is this related to Google Summer of Code?

No, Summer of Nix is an independent program organised by the NixOS Foundation.
It is funded by the European Commission via the NLnet Foundation.

Summer of Nix was originally modeled after Google Summer of Code, but has developed its own profile.
We use the [purchasing power parity data](https://developers.google.com/open-source/gsoc/help/student-stipends#total_stipend_amount) from Google Summer of Code to calculate our stipends.

### Why does this NGI-sponsored program use this or that software?

We do our best to select free and open source, privacy-respecting software.
But this is not a hard constraint, nor the only criterion.

We use:

- [GitHub](https://github.com/) for development and public technical discussion
- [Matrix](https://matrix.org/) for private, ephemeral, or real-time communication
- [Notion](https://notion.so/) for accounting

As a participant, you will need an account on each of these services.

## Testimonials

> I had been a Nixpkgs contributor for about an year when I took part in Summer of Nix, so this was a great opportunity to go a step deeper into the Nix ecosystem.
> For me more importantly than the technical outcomes of this program, I met some talented and passionate folks from the community, whom I'm still in contact with today.
> I came to get more involved with Nix, Nixpkgs, NixOS and everything around it, and I didn't expect this to be a foundational stepping stone in my career journey.
> This does come from the on-paper value of the program, but more so from the latent knowledge gained thanks to my mentors and peers with their experience in a diverse set of fields.
> I'm lucky to have had a chance to contribute to things that I love, and very grateful for everyone involved in this program being as supportive and caring as they were.
>
> — [@GetPsyched](https://github.com/getpsyched/), Summer of Nix 2024 participant, [release editor for NixOS 24.11](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/lets-have-a-great-24-11-release-cycle/51549)

<!-- -->

> I participated as a mentor in the first two Summers of Nix.
> This gave me an opportunity to help introduce others to the ecosystem and gain experience leading a globally distributed team.
> The greatest outcome was the joy of [seeing some of the participants stick around](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FY66f8epAE8) and grow to become major contributors.
> The program is an effective way to create value in open source as well as make the Nix ecosystem stronger, with a focus on the people that make up the community.
>
> — [@tomberek](https://github.com/tomberek/), Summer of Nix participant (2021 and 2022), [Nix maintainer](https://github.com/orgs/NixOS/teams/nix-team) (since 2022) and [Nix Community Steering Committee](https://github.com/NixOS/org/blob/bef9342c85519784532cd647f91c341cae5e3bed/doc/governance.md) member (2025)

## Contact

[Open an issue](https://github.com/ngi-nix/summer-of-nix/issues) to ask a question in public.
Send direct messages for questions that require privacy.

Members of our team will also be available to answer any of your questions directly in the [Nix@NGI office hours](https://jitsi.lassul.us/ngi-nix-office-hours) Jitsi room, every [Tuesdays and Thursdays, 15:00 to 16:00 Europe/Berlin](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/u/0/embed?src=b9o52fobqjak8oq8lfkhg3t0qg@group.calendar.google.com).

Responsible: Valentin Gagarin (program direction)

- GitHub: [@fricklerhandwerk](https://github.com/fricklerhandwerk)
- Matrix: [@fricklerhandwerk:matrix.org](https://matrix.to/#/@fricklerhandwerk:matrix.org)
- Email: [ngi@nixos.org](mailto:ngi@nixos.org)

Accountable: [Stichting NixOS Foundation](https://github.com/NixOS/foundation/) (legal partner in the NGI Zero consortium, fiscal host)

Consulted and informed: [Nix Community Steering Committee](https://github.com/NixOS/org/blob/main/doc/governance.md) (governing body of the Nix ecosystem)

## Annual reports

- [Report: 2024 Summer of Nix](https://ngi-nix.github.io/summer-of-nix/SoN-2024-report.pdf)
- [Report: 2023 Summer of Nix](https://ngi-nix.github.io/summer-of-nix/SoN-2023-report.pdf)
- [Report: 2022 Summer of Nix](https://ngi-nix.github.io/summer-of-nix/SoN-2022-report.pdf)
- [Report: 2021 Summer of Nix](https://ngi-nix.github.io/summer-of-nix/SoN-2021-report.pdf)

## Acknowledgements

Summer of Nix is funded by the European Commission's [Next Generation Internet (NGI)](https://www.ngi.eu/) initiative through the [NLNet Foundation](https://nlnet.nl/) and the [NixOS Foundation](https://github.com/NixOS/foundation).

[<img src="https://nlnet.nl/image/logos/EC.svg" alt="European Commission logo" style="width:10rem;" />](https://ngi.eu/about/)
&nbsp;&nbsp;
[<img src="https://nlnet.nl/logo/banner.svg" alt="NLnet foundation logo" style="width:10rem;" />](https://nlnet.nl/foundation/)

Commit message:

add note on email issues

README.md, after:

# Summer of Nix 2025

Summer of Nix is a coordinated effort to support selected free and open source software (FOSS) projects, by making them available on NixOS.
It is funded by the European Commission's [Next Generation Internet (NGI)](https://www.ngi.eu/) initiative through the [NLNet Foundation](https://nlnet.nl/) and the [NixOS Foundation](https://github.com/NixOS/foundation).

This northern-hemisphere-summer program is designed for students and early-career professionals.
It is an opportunity to:
- Practice disciplined software development with Nix in an organisational setting
- Work with a dedicated team of experienced maintainers
- Contribute to the public good and receive some payment for it

Participation in Summer of Nix can also be a pathway to attractive jobs in software development.

Learn more about Nix on [nix.dev](https://nix.dev/).
Follow [updates on Summer of Nix on the NixOS Discourse](https://discourse.nixos.org/c/events/summer-of-nix/45).

## Goals

The program is intended for participants to **work, learn, and meet**:

- Improving the deployment story of [software projects funded by the NLnet Foundation](https://nlnet.nl/project/)

  Just writing the code is not enough: Programs have to be easy to obtain and run to be widely adopted.
  Getting complex software to work reliably on a whim is the aspiration for Summer of Nix.

  As a participant, you will write Nix derivations, NixOS modules, integration tests, and documentation.
  And you will solve a lot of tricky problems on the way.

- Skill-sharing among participants

  Making computers useful for a mass audience requires diverse skills and broad knowledge, and no one person has it all.

  As a participant, you will learn from – and teach – your peers about widely used programming languages, software testing, technical writing, web design, and the Nix ecosystem with its various tools.
  You will closely collaborate with a mentor and the project team on a regular schedule.

- Growing the Nix community

  As a participant, you will be at the heart of a community with [more than 700 active contributors](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pulse/monthly).
  You will engage in an open source software development workflow and take part in public technical discussion.

  After successful participation, you will be invited to NixCon 2025, a conference for Nix users and developers from all over the world.
  And you will be afforded an opportunity for exposure with potential employers for whom Nix is a core strength.

## Timeline

- March: Organisers recruit mentors
- April to May: Mentors recruit participants
- June to September: Work period with regular meetings

## Applications

### Requirements

To be considered for participation, applicants must demonstrate:
- Fluency in English
- Essential programming skills, including proficiency with
  - Plain text editing
  - Git version control
  - Programming in Bash
- Competence with the Nix language, the module system, NixOS tests, and related tools

Additionally, applicants have to:
- Meet the [technical requirements](#technical-requirements)
- Be available for a total of 160 hours of regular sessions over 13 weeks

### Selection criteria

We are looking for quick learners with a computational mindset.
We select for qualification and motivation, and especially appreciate candidates with:
- Ability to troubleshoot software written in any of: C, Rust, Python, PHP, Java, JavaScript 
- Non-trivial contributions to Nixpkgs
- Packages maintained in Nixpkgs
- [Merge access to Nixpkgs](https://github.com/NixOS/org/blob/main/doc/nixpkgs-committers.md)

We also value diverse perspectives and backgrounds.
People who identify as members of groups currently underrepresented in open source software development communities are particularly encouraged to apply.
We put emphasis on establishing a safe, respectful, and inclusive environment where everyone can contribute their best.

### Eligibility

Natural persons of legal age from anywhere in the world can apply.

You must be able to receive payments via one of:

- Bank transfer
- [PayPal](https://www.paypal.com)
- [Wise](https://wise.com)

### Stipends

Stipends are adjusted to purchasing power parity for your country of residence: [list of stipends by country](./stipends.md).

### How to apply

Please provide the following information:

- GitHub handle
- Programming languages and tooling experience
- Notable contributions to the Nix ecosystem
- Which projects would you like to work on and why?

  Pick between 1 and 3 projects from our [issue tracker](https://github.com/ngi-nix/ngipkgs/issues?q=is%3Aissue%20state%3Aopen%20label%3A%22NGI%20Project%22).
  You can add missing projects using the [project triaging template](https://github.com/ngi-nix/ngipkgs/issues/new?template=project-triaging.yaml).

- What do you expect to gain from participating?

  Write one or two paragraphs to give us an impression of yourself.

- Time zone and availability
- How did you learn about Summer of Nix?

Be creative! Feel free to add what you deem important for us to know.

Don't worry if your profile doesn't perfectly align with the listed criteria:
Showcase your passions and adjacent skills.
We appreciate both transferable experience and potential.

<details><summary>Example application</summary>

```text
GitHub handle: @jane-random

Programming languages and tooling experience:
(beginner, intermediate, proficient, advanced, expert)
- Nix: intermediate
- Bash: proficient
- Git: advanced

Notable contributions to the Nix ecosystem:
- Added Keyoxide metadata: https://github.com/ngi-nix/ngipkgs/pull/558

Projects I would like to work on:
- Pixelfed: https://github.com/ngi-nix/ngipkgs/issues/819
  to be able to host my own instance

What I expect to gain from participating:
- Connect with the community and learn from Nix experts

Time zone and availability:
- Monday to Friday: 09:00—-14:00 Europe/Berlin
- Wednesday: 15:00--18:00 Europe/Berlin

How did you learn about Summer of Nix?
- @joe-random brought it up during one of our discussions
```

</details>

Send a plain text email, without any attachments, images, or other embedded elements until 2025-05-12 0:00UTC to
[ngi@nixos.org](mailto:ngi@nixos.org?subject=Summer%20of%20Nix%202025%3A%20%3CYOUR_NAME%3E%20application&body=GitHub%20handle%3A%20%40jane-random%0A%0AProgramming%20languages%20and%20tooling%20experience%3A%0A(beginner%2C%20intermediate%2C%20proficient%2C%20advanced%2C%20expert)%0A-%20Nix%3A%20intermediate%0A-%20Bash%3A%20proficient%0A-%20Git%3A%20advanced%0A%0ANotable%20contributions%20to%20the%20Nix%20ecosystem%3A%0A-%20Added%20Keyoxide%20metadata%3A%20https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fngi-nix%2Fngipkgs%2Fpull%2F558%0A%0AProjects%20I%20would%20like%20to%20work%20on%3A%0A-%20Pixelfed%3A%20https%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2Fngi-nix%2Fngipkgs%2Fissues%2F819%0A%20%20to%20be%20able%20to%20host%20my%20own%20instance%0A%0AWhat%20I%20expect%20to%20gain%20from%20participating%3A%0A-%20Connect%20with%20the%20community%20and%20learn%20from%20Nix%20experts%0A%0ATime%20zone%20and%20availability%3A%0A-%20Monday%20to%20Friday%3A%2009%3A00--14%3A00%20Europe%2FBerlin%0A-%20Wednesday%3A%2015%3A00--18%3A00%20Europe%2FBerlin%0A%0AHow%20did%20you%20learn%20about%20Summer%20of%20Nix%3F%0A-%20%40joe-random%20brought%20it%20up%20during%20one%20of%20our%20discussions%0A).

We're currently experiencing intermittent issues with our email infrastructure.
If and only if you don't get a reply within 3 business days, please send your application on Matrix to `@idabzo:matrix.org`.

### Schedule

- Application phase: 2025-04-17 to 2025-05-12

  After the application closes the team will select up to 10 candidates for interviews.

- Interview phase: 2025-05-19 to 2025-05-28

  Selected candidates will have a video call with team members.

- Final selection: 2025-05-31

  A contract offer will be sent to 2 to 3 applicants for confirmation.

## Technical requirements

Effective remote collaboration requires being able to simultaneously share your screen, view others' screens, talk to each other, and compile software.
This is only possible with sufficiently performant hardware, and therefore it's a condition for participation:

- Video camera
- Headphones and reasonable-quality microphone
- Consistently low-noise environment
- Enough processing power for multiple concurrent video streams
- Sufficient and stable bandwidth throughout multiple hours of video call

From the organisers' experience, mobile data is unlikely to suffice.

Please ask a friend to make a test call on [Jitsi Meet](https://meet.jit.si/) to ensure that they can see your screen and hear you well.

## Questions and answers

### How to get notifications and updates?

Notifications are posted in the public Matrix room [Summer of Nix Announcements](https://matrix.to/#/#summer-of-nix-announce:matrix.org).
Set up your [Matrix client](https://matrix.org/try-matrix/) to receive push notifications on new messages.

News about the program are published in the [Summer of Nix Discourse category](https://discourse.nixos.org/c/events/summer-of-nix/45).
[Subscribe](https://meta.discourse.org/t/notifications-primer/228439) to receive push notifications or emails on new messages.

### Do I have to pay taxes on my stipend?

It depends.
**You are responsible for observing the laws that apply to you when receiving payments.**

The stipend is compensation for work towards a non-profit cause.
This means that in some jurisdictions it may be exempt from income tax, value-added tax (VAT), or from counting towards social insurance or health insurance obligations.

In some jurisdictions you may have to register a business to legally account for receiving payments.

Note that the stipend amount is exactly what the NixOS Foundation can pay.
If you have to process VAT, the gross expense for the NixOS Foundation still must be the stipend amount, even if you put "reverse charge" on the invoice.

### Is this related to Google Summer of Code?

No, Summer of Nix is an independent program organised by the NixOS Foundation.
It is funded by the European Commission via the NLnet Foundation.

Summer of Nix was originally modeled after Google Summer of Code, but has developed its own profile.
We use the [purchasing power parity data](https://developers.google.com/open-source/gsoc/help/student-stipends#total_stipend_amount) from Google Summer of Code to calculate our stipends.

### Why does this NGI-sponsored program use this or that software?

We do our best to select free and open source, privacy-respecting software.
But this is not a hard constraint, nor the only criterion.

We use:

- [GitHub](https://github.com/) for development and public technical discussion
- [Matrix](https://matrix.org/) for private, ephemeral, or real-time communication
- [Notion](https://notion.so/) for accounting

As a participant, you will need an account on each of these services.

## Testimonials

> I had been a Nixpkgs contributor for about an year when I took part in Summer of Nix, so this was a great opportunity to go a step deeper into the Nix ecosystem.
> For me more importantly than the technical outcomes of this program, I met some talented and passionate folks from the community, whom I'm still in contact with today.
> I came to get more involved with Nix, Nixpkgs, NixOS and everything around it, and I didn't expect this to be a foundational stepping stone in my career journey.
> This does come from the on-paper value of the program, but more so from the latent knowledge gained thanks to my mentors and peers with their experience in a diverse set of fields.
> I'm lucky to have had a chance to contribute to things that I love, and very grateful for everyone involved in this program being as supportive and caring as they were.
>
> — [@GetPsyched](https://github.com/getpsyched/), Summer of Nix 2024 participant, [release editor for NixOS 24.11](https://discourse.nixos.org/t/lets-have-a-great-24-11-release-cycle/51549)

<!-- -->

> I participated as a mentor in the first two Summers of Nix.
> This gave me an opportunity to help introduce others to the ecosystem and gain experience leading a globally distributed team.
> The greatest outcome was the joy of [seeing some of the participants stick around](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FY66f8epAE8) and grow to become major contributors.
> The program is an effective way to create value in open source as well as make the Nix ecosystem stronger, with a focus on the people that make up the community.
>
> — [@tomberek](https://github.com/tomberek/), Summer of Nix participant (2021 and 2022), [Nix maintainer](https://github.com/orgs/NixOS/teams/nix-team) (since 2022) and [Nix Community Steering Committee](https://github.com/NixOS/org/blob/bef9342c85519784532cd647f91c341cae5e3bed/doc/governance.md) member (2025)

## Contact

[Open an issue](https://github.com/ngi-nix/summer-of-nix/issues) to ask a question in public.
Send direct messages for questions that require privacy.

Members of our team will also be available to answer any of your questions directly in the [Nix@NGI office hours](https://jitsi.lassul.us/ngi-nix-office-hours) Jitsi room, every [Tuesdays and Thursdays, 15:00 to 16:00 Europe/Berlin](https://calendar.google.com/calendar/u/0/embed?src=b9o52fobqjak8oq8lfkhg3t0qg@group.calendar.google.com).

Responsible: Valentin Gagarin (program direction)

- GitHub: [@fricklerhandwerk](https://github.com/fricklerhandwerk)
- Matrix: [@fricklerhandwerk:matrix.org](https://matrix.to/#/@fricklerhandwerk:matrix.org)
- Email: [ngi@nixos.org](mailto:ngi@nixos.org)

Accountable: [Stichting NixOS Foundation](https://github.com/NixOS/foundation/) (legal partner in the NGI Zero consortium, fiscal host)

Consulted and informed: [Nix Community Steering Committee](https://github.com/NixOS/org/blob/main/doc/governance.md) (governing body of the Nix ecosystem)

## Annual reports

- [Report: 2024 Summer of Nix](https://ngi-nix.github.io/summer-of-nix/SoN-2024-report.pdf)
- [Report: 2023 Summer of Nix](https://ngi-nix.github.io/summer-of-nix/SoN-2023-report.pdf)
- [Report: 2022 Summer of Nix](https://ngi-nix.github.io/summer-of-nix/SoN-2022-report.pdf)
- [Report: 2021 Summer of Nix](https://ngi-nix.github.io/summer-of-nix/SoN-2021-report.pdf)

## Acknowledgements

Summer of Nix is funded by the European Commission's [Next Generation Internet (NGI)](https://www.ngi.eu/) initiative through the [NLNet Foundation](https://nlnet.nl/) and the [NixOS Foundation](https://github.com/NixOS/foundation).

[<img src="https://nlnet.nl/image/logos/EC.svg" alt="European Commission logo" style="width:10rem;" />](https://ngi.eu/about/)
&nbsp;&nbsp;
[<img src="https://nlnet.nl/logo/banner.svg" alt="NLnet foundation logo" style="width:10rem;" />](https://nlnet.nl/foundation/)
